[WHOOSH]
[ETHEREAL MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: The notion
of any absolute good and evil
seems to become an archaic
thought in a world driven
by preference and relativism.
But is it?
Hermeticist and modern day
philosopher Neil Kramer
is back with us.
And we're going to
talk about the basics,
the nature of good and
evil, right and wrong.
And this is really
unpopular because it's
an anything-goes world.
And we know that.
We've seen this through a
lot of phenomena going on
in the world.
Everyone has their own notion
of what reality is now,
where we used to have more
kind of consensus reality.
One can argue whether that's
a good thing or a bad thing.
But I think we need to go
even deeper into the basics.
So Neil, thank you for gracing
us with your presence again.
And let's start with reality.
What does reality even mean?
And what is reality to you?
>>NEIL KRAMER: Reality is what
is real, and only what is real.
It's not a personal creation.
It's not your interface.
It's the world.
Reality is the
world that is real.
It reveals itself only
to those who seek it.
So I would say most people
that we meet in our lives, most
people we cross in
the street, most
people in spiritual communities
and in materialist communities
don't know what reality is.
They move in it, but
they don't see it.
So it only reveals
itself to those
who pursue it because it is an
inherently supernatural thing.
It's material aspect.
It's slight.
It's real nature
is supernatural,
which is why most
people don't pursue it
because it is a divine thing.
So if you don't
accept that, it's
going to limit you
from the beginning.
So the pursuit of
truth will lead you
to reality over a
century, over 100 years.
So you're not going to see it
fully until you're 60, 70, 80.
Prior to that, you're
going to see a little bit.
Reality is the real
world and nothing else.
And it's one thing.
And it's the same for everybody.
>>REGINA: So it sounds
like what you're
saying is to see
reality, we have
to see the unseen building
blocks and constructs that
actually make reality.
>>KRAMER: You have to
see what is real first.
You have to see the trees.
You have to see the
mountains and rivers.
>>REGINA: By the five
sense world real.
>>KRAMER: Sure.
So you have to understand first,
the natural creation is here.
How real it is is a
slightly different question.
But it's here.
And it symbolizes and
typifies what is actual.
So that's the
beginning place which
is why it's very smart and wise
to draw young minds and hearts
to nature and education.
So let's look at nature,
because that's going to tell us
something that's real.
Whereas the city,
the suburban life,
the mainstream culture
is not going to do that.
It's going to lead you
away from what is real.
Nature symbolizes reality.
Nature shows us something
toward the creator.
That's a starting point,
is to examine its presence.
As to the purpose
and nature of that,
that's a different question.
>>REGINA: Right.
And we can get into
that whenever you like.
But let's go to the
next part first,
which is the new
age nostrum that we
can create our own reality.
>>KRAMER: Yeah, garbage.
>>REGINA: And that
is essentially
where everybody's living.
We're all in our own movie.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: It's very
hard to move anything
of a coherent and
constructive nature forward
when you can't get anyone
in the same place thinking
in a similar way at the same
time, perceiving reality
the same way.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
Yeah, well, if reality
is only what is real,
then that makes us all in a
quite inequitable place, which
is to say, it's a
level playing field.
Everyone has the same
access to reality.
If you're born,
and you're alive,
and you can think and feel--
which most people can--
you have total
access to reality.
And the truth of that
reality is available.
It's a really strange thing to
say that truth is available.
Today, unlike any other
period in human history
that I can think of,
the truth is there
to find in any walk of life--
political, social, cultural,
artistic, spiritual,
physiological, nutritional--
whatever you care to think
of, truth is available.
And if people want that
truth, they can go to it.
And you have to develop
a field of expertise.
You can't know
all truth, but you
can focus on the things
that are most important.
Most people don't
want the truth.
What they want is
to settle instead
for a very satisfying fantasy.
>>REGINA: Well, like a
reflection of their desires
being manifest.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
So they'll say, well,
I'm glad you've got
your reality and your truth.
And that's cool, because I've
got my reality and my truth.
That's the sign of a fantasist
who has found not truth,
but a very comfortable
delusional state in which they
can dwell.
Now some people, I have to
say, do that rather pleasingly
and rather harmlessly.
And some of those people--
I mean, it's none
of my business.
If they want to do that, they
can do that all day long.
Many people, though, do
that in a harmful way
where it's actually
damaging and destructive.
So their delusion has
lots of conditions.
And those conditions--
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about the damage,
that that kind of mindset
of creating reality is.
>>KRAMER: Well, if you're
protecting a fantasy,
you don't want it
interfered with.
Because it's like your
reality happy bubble
place and all the
accouterments and phenomena
that associate with that.
You have to defend it
because it's vulnerable,
because it's unreal.
And one of those things
is don't offend me.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KRAMER: So don't
offend me in my bubble
because your offense is an
existential threat to my life.
Because if my belief
systems collapse--
however pleasing and
pleasant, and apparently sort
of humane in modern era--
then I'm in a
difficult position.
So that's most people's
opposition to the truth,
is that it actually interferes
with their spiritual
and material delusions.
So they don't want the truth.
They want fantasy.
Most people I ever see anywhere
in the world in all walks
of life, they want fantasy.
That's what people want.
They settle for a fantasy.
>>REGINA: I think
that is largely true.
And it's like I said in
the open of the show,
it's an archaic thought.
Hermetics themselves
are archaic in a sense,
because they strip you down
to the basic nature of reality
in so many ways, where
people are being encouraged
through modern
life to go anywhere
except to the discovery of where
the nature of reality truly is.
I mean, this is a
preference-driven world.
>>KRAMER: Yeah, it is.
And I think that
in my early life,
I was interested
in esoteric study--
hermetism, rosicrucianism--
>>REGINA: Yeah, all of it.
>>KRAMER: --occultic
practices, lots of things.
But all the time behind
that was Christianity.
So if you're a hermetist, you're
dealing with Christianity.
And what I learned from my
esoteric Christian studies is
there's an enormous
difference between real,
pure Christian practice--
which is super jedi hard core
excellence--
>>REGINA: Mystical.
>>KRAMER: --and the institution
of the church, which
is almost nothing to
do with Christianity.
>>REGINA: Worlds apart, yeah.
>>KRAMER: So 2.4, 2.5
billion Christians--
I would say-- sadly,
don't really know
what true Christian
practice is because it's
hard to understand.
I've studied the Bible
for 30 years now.
And I'd say I'm just
understanding it
now because it is coded.
It's not meant to be open in
its deeper layers to everyone.
And some Bible scholars
I know personally
would disagree with me on that.
Because it's a book written
for every man, every woman.
I see that.
It is true in this
parable and moral fiber.
And a compass of righteous
behavior, good virtue,
integrity, no question.
But the deeper layers of it--
prophecy, knowing divinity,
birth, death, afterlife--
the supernatural presence of
evil and good in the world
is unparalleled in its
potency and its profundity.
And it's not visible
to the average reader.
>>REGINA: You have to
have maturity, knowledge.
>>KRAMER: You have
to have maturity
in your own experiential
life, but you also
need instruction as well.
Without Bible
scholarship instruction,
I don't know whether
I'd have ever understood
what it was actually saying.
And that opens up part of our
discussion about absolutism
and relativism.
Because one of the big
threats to empire society
today-- empire being
this system of control.
And it totally rules
mainstream life.
A threat to that is absolutism.
And the absolutism of
something like Christianity
is a danger to
mainstream culture.
And it is a danger because
it pulls it to pieces.
>>REGINA: Or, not
to the religion,
Christianity, but to the actual
mystical meaning and practice
behind it.
>>KRAMER: True Christianity.
>>REGINA: True.
>>KRAMER: True, true esoteric
Christianity is Christianity.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>KRAMER: The church stuff
is a contamination of it.
So actual Christianity is
mystical esoteric Christianity.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
I hear you on that.
OK, let's go back to
reality for one more moment.
The five sense world,
a lot of people say,
forget the five sense world.
Really, it's just a
construct of the mind.
But you can touch a tree.
These are agreed-upon
realities if you're
going to live on Earth, right?
>>KRAMER: Yeah, they are
here for important purpose.
>>REGINA: They're here
for-- so let's talk
about the meaning behind the
construct of Earth's reality,
our five sense
tangible, sensual world
which everything
is produced from.
>>KRAMER: Sure.
Well, if you were
a teacher teaching
real esoteric spiritual lore--
L-O-R-E-- and life, you
would take newcomers--
whether they're
children, or whether
they're in the 50's or
60's, it doesn't matter.
You would take them into
the natural landscape.
And you would say, nature
shows us God's imagination.
And it shows us it in two ways.
The first way is
that nature shows us
incredible unparalleled beauty.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KRAMER: I could name so many
things, especially living in--
>>REGINA: But that's a
virtue worth living for.
>>KRAMER: It it.
Beauty makes life
worth it often.
>>REGINA: It does.
>>KRAMER: And when everything
else is broken and fallen
to pieces, as happens in
life, beauty is there.
So I take myself at
bad times in life
to the mountains, the rivers,
the meadows, the pastures,
the forests, the deserts.
And I see incredible beauty.
I see harmony.
I see elegance.
I see love.
I see this enormous
ecology of life
where everything is finding
equilibrium and a sense
of goodness together.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KRAMER: That's
on the one hand.
There's a flip side to that,
which is nature also shows
us it is savage.
It is hostile.
It is parasitic.
And it cares nothing
for human life, nothing.
So if I go and hike in my
Olympic National Forest,
a cougar will come
and rip my throat out.
And I'm dead in a gully for two
weeks until somebody finds--
>>REGINA: And it's not personal.
>>KRAMER: It's not personal.
Doesn't know who I am.
It's not disagreeing with me.
It's just the hostile
nature of this landscape.
So nature shows you two things.
One is harmony, and
one is disharmony.
And the esoteric teaching in
that that nature reveals--
and this is a big thing to
say, but I'm happy to say it--
what that shows us is that this
is not our natural environment.
This world is not our home.
>>REGINA: It's not
where the soul resides.
>>KRAMER: It's not our home
in any way, shape, or form.
Soul is not here, although
the vessel of soul is here.
But what fills it?
Spirit is not here.
So our original home is gone.
This is a world of
teaching which is finite.
And then a new world comes.
This world is meant
to be disharmonious.
Nature shows us that.
So this finiteness of this world
and the inherent brokenness
of it is the teaching mechanism.
Polarization.
Good, evil, right,
wrong, broken, whole.
That's the tough
thing in reality
that you have to realize as
Christ did, as Buddha did.
Christ says this world is
broken, but it's teaching.
Buddha says this world is
suffering, but it's teaching.
Don't try and pretend
it's not suffering.
Don't seek for a truth that's
like a bomb or a medicine
or a bandage for your suffering.
Understand that your suffering
will purify you and show you
truth.
So you're changing
your relationship
with the pain of
reality to suffer less.
So you purify, you suffer less.
Now that is a tough teaching
that most people in this day
don't want to suffer at all.
They'll do anything
to avoid suffering.
>>REGINA: Well, indeed.
And we have every single
distraction in the world
to help us avoid it.
>>KRAMER: A million.
>>REGINA: But the
notion of suffering
also has to do with attachment.
And once we attach
to whether it's
an idea, a person,
a thing, or whatnot,
and that is being
removed from our reality,
that tends to create a lot
of what we call suffering.
>>KRAMER: Indeed.
And that, again, is a great
Hindu and Christian principle
shared well between those two
ways of perceiving reality.
For me, what my
Christian upbringing
showed me is that if
you attach yourself
to anything in this world,
you've made a big mistake.
Because this world--
as Paul told us,
as Christ told us, as Peter
told us-- is passing away.
So to invest in this
would be foolish.
Emotionally, mentally,
financially, materially, it
would be foolish.
Nevertheless, its
presence is important.
It's a teaching mechanism.
Its illusionary
nature is irrelevant.
Its presence is what counts.
So to cast this off as
Maya, illusion, samsara,
is an error in my view.
>>REGINA: I think
it's an error as well.
>>KRAMER: I think that
would be a mistake.
>>REGINA: This is
our learning ground.
It's our school
and our playground.
>>KRAMER: And to
live in a body that
is dying as soon as it
is born is incredible.
It's part of the
teaching mechanism.
So the very mortality of a
human being, 100 years of life--
a little less, a little more--
are not set.
And then, you know, you wake
up and your body's changing.
Your form changes.
You have illness.
You have disease.
You have pain, sorrow.
People are born.
People die.
People come into our lives.
People go out of our lives.
This is the teaching.
None of these things are
separate from spiritual life.
They are spiritual life.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>KRAMER: So the
physical reality
is what we're being
asked to look at.
Now the spiritual
reality is there too.
But it's the physical
reality is forcing you
to embody your spiritual truth.
If it's not
embodied, if it's not
every day in your home-- in
the kitchen, in the workplace,
in the supermarket--
then it's not real.
So the physical compels you
to deal with what is real.
>>REGINA: I couldn't
agree with you more.
It's engaging with life in
the five sensory world--
>>KRAMER: Embracing
the whole thing.
>>REGINA: --where the
lessons are all of it.
>>KRAMER: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK, so let
me ask you about this.
This is another overlay,
an esoteric one.
And Tom Campbell's work,
"My Big TOE", right?
The way he describes
reality as we experience
is a collectively
rendered reality.
Because the people who
are incarnating here
on this planet,
at this time, have
chosen to have this playground
as our collective experience--
even if the tree is
no more a tree than it
is a shoe, if you just look
at it from a quantum physics
level.
So somehow we have all agreed
to play in this together.
>>KRAMER: I see that
a little differently.
I love Tom Campbell, by the way.
He totally rocks.
But I see it differently
to him on this one.
This is a made world.
It was designed and we
had nothing to do with it.
So I don't see that in that way.
>>REGINA: Well, I
mean, it is interesting
because that would
denote that we've
created the world around us.
>>KRAMER: We haven't.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KRAMER: In my life, I
see no evidence for that.
I go to my sources of wisdom--
me, God, wise men and women
I know, spiritual literature.
And none of those things
corroborate that for me.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KRAMER: The way I feel now is
that this world was agreed upon
to be in by our ancestors--
so the original man,
the original woman.
And again, you see
this in hermetism.
You see it in Christianity.
You see it in many
other systems.
Our ancestors made the decision
to know the wisdom of God,
to know the discriminating
power of good and evil,
to know those things.
We, therefore-- through
heritage and their endowment--
have come here to
complete that project.
To know good and evil, to know
right and wrong, to know truth
and falsehood in this
world that is expertly
made as a classroom--
to compel that to happen.
And the bad guys--
again, supernatural origin,
but the human administrators
of that--
all they have to do is persuade
you that that's all garbage.
And if that's what
you should do,
is look after your own comfort
and security and entertainment,
there is nothing to discern.
There's nothing to discriminate.
Good and evil is an
old-fashioned idea.
And frankly, it's gone away.
>>REGINA: It's subjective.
>>KRAMER: They would
love you to think that.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>KRAMER: And as
soon as that happens,
you are de-spiritualizing.
Because truth, goodness,
beauty, rightness
are absolute, totally absolute--
one thing for everyone,
no exceptions.
>>REGINA: I happen to
agree with you on that.
And just recently,
even in my own work
with my own little
merry band of patrons--
right-- I started bringing
up the notion that it's time
to start really going into
reflections of what the true
virtues are and mean-- how
we embody them, how we don't.
And start really diving
deep into the great virtues
because I don't think
we can find our way back
even to the knowledge of good
and evil and right and wrong,
if we can't experience,
in ourselves,
what those virtues are.
Such as, as you say, beauty,
truth, courage, kindness,
generosity, compassion.
>>KRAMER: You're speaking
of the fruits of spirit.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KRAMER: So if you speak
of that in Christian terms,
there are gifts of spirit--
powers of prophecy,
of knowledge, of wisdom.
And there are fruits of spirit--
self-control, goodness,
kindness, and so on, and so
forth.
Those things are demonstrations
of spiritual accomplishment.
Nothing else, those things.
As to your prophecy,
which would-- oh,
if something phenomenal is
happening, it must be from God.
Not necessarily.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>KRAMER: So a lot of people
go to ayahuasca retreats,
have phenomenal experiences.
A lot of people will use
cannabis and mushrooms
and have phenomenal experiences.
They'll have a dream.
Something extraordinary
will happen.
They'll have a synchronicity.
Something very striking
will happen to them.
And they'll say, this is
the universe speaking to me.
Not necessarily God, though.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>KRAMER: Not
necessarily goodness.
So don't confuse phenomena
with spiritual truth.
They're not the same.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
>>KRAMER: I say that across
the board, not to you.
I think you probably
know the difference.
>>REGINA: I understand
what you're saying.
>>KRAMER: But you know, as
we move around in the world,
a lot of people don't get that.
A lot of people
listening to this show,
I think it's a little bit
of a different audience.
They'll appreciate
this much more.
But in mainstream society,
those things are unknown.
>>REGINA: They are unknown.
And so there, to me, we
have to look at, as you say,
the bad guys or the
good guys, right?
We need to look at the
greater picture of the realms
beyond the Earth plane.
At least sandwich out one
plane up and one plane down,
that we are sandwiched between
dimensions of refinement
and less refinement--
lighter and darker.
And so if these realms
and the beings within them
can permeate into
this realm, and begin
influencing, demanding,
interfering, even giving
lovely guidance and such.
We're never alone
because we are depending
on our own field of resonance.
We are always being
influenced also
from these higher
and lower realms.
>>KRAMER: Agreed.
>>REGINA: Can you talk
about that whole dance
and share with people,
even viscerally,
what that looks like?
And you can use outlandish
language if you wish to.
>>KRAMER: Good.
I like to hear that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Because it's important
we understand
we're being influenced by both.
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
The key thing to
see here, for me,
is that free will and
the absolute sovereignty
of the individual's
decision-making process.
To know good and evil, to
know right and wrong, to know
truth and falsehood is primary.
All the time, there are positive
disembodied supernatural
entities trying to promote
discernment and positive
excellent discrimination.
An undiscriminating
human is about human.
You want discriminating,
discerning, knowledgeable,
wise, judgmental humans.
Judgment-- if you can't
judge, you'll be dead.
If I can't judge to cross the
road if it's safe, I'm dead.
If I can't judge a good
person from a bad person,
I'm in trouble.
So you want discrimination
judgment, discernment, knowing.
There are negative disembodied
supernatural entities-- real,
very real--
who want the opposite of that,
who want you to not judge,
not discriminate.
And you can see
the parallels there
in mainstream culture
at the moment.
Don't be judgmental.
Don't discriminate.
They don't want you
to see absolutes,
that everything's relative.
It's all about, essentially,
human ethics and laws that ebb
and flow over the millennia.
That's wrong.
That's demonic influence,
no question about it.
I don't like to talk
about that a ton,
because I like to put the
power where it belongs,
which is a God-given
power in free will, which
all those entities-- strangely
enough-- have to respect.
What the negative demonic
powers do, which-- again,
I emphasize that I'm not
speaking figuratively,
I mean literally--
what they want to do
is persuade you to
give your power away.
It's a little bit like the
mythology of a vampire.
Vampire knocks on your door
and says, oh, hello, Regina.
I wonder if I could perhaps
come in for a few minutes
and maybe we could
have a cocktail.
And you go, uh, sure.
As soon as you've given
permission, he's got you.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KRAMER: If you say
no, he cannot come in.
Why?
Because you've been
given divine will.
So even those
entities who appear
so powerful and
mysterious and sinister,
they have to respect free will.
So the only power that
empire, the administration
of that supernatural
force, and the supernatural
forces themselves have--
the only power they
have is the trick
to get you to give your
consent to their naughtiness.
>>REGINA: Indeed.
Now have you, by chance, read
the book, "The Golden Star"
by Jean Michaud--
M-I-C-H-A-U-D?
French author, although I
think he lived in Britain.
This was in the early
part of the last century.
And he wrote a little book.
And it's a tale told by a
sage to two little children
to take them through the
seven realms of existence.
>>KRAMER: Oh, right.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so what
was beautiful about it
is that it was showing
these little children, yes,
these thunderous inky skies,
and these distorted beings--
and is very visceral.
It's a wonderful read--
all the way up to the
most sublime realms,
was that these beings are
living at their level of reality
and learning.
And they may be
bleeding over into this.
But that is their
job, in a sense--
whether it's self-designated--
to live as they live,
influence as they
do, and do what
they do because that's their
level of maturity as a being.
>>KRAMER: I get you.
>>REGINA: Yeah?
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And so it's
not even in one sense,
and in some senses,
it's not even malicious.
Now there are, I think,
very, very powerful entities
that work from
darker realms who do
know the difference
between right and wrong
and-- for reasons I will
never comprehend-- choose
to create negative influences
on various planets,
including this one.
>>KRAMER: Yeah,
we'll have to talk
about that some other time.
>>REGINA: We'll
talk about it later.
But I'm just saying
that it's their job.
They're just acting
like they do.
And the upper realms
are acting as they do.
>>KRAMER: Well, let me come
on that a moment, though.
Because it's so fascinating,
I can't pass that up.
>>REGINA: OK, please.
Please do.
We've got time.
>>KRAMER: OK, so those
negative entities,
they're part of the test.
So this life is a test.
It's a gift of learning, sure.
But it's a test of faith,
experiential faith,
in spiritual reality.
It's a test of that.
And spiritual reality is
reality because it is spiritual.
And I can prove that.
I can evidence that.
I can show people why
that is, but I'm not
interested in that right now.
I'm just going to
presume a lot of people
feel a similar way
while listening to this.
Any people who
didn't feel that way,
I'm happy to get into that.
But the point I want
to make at the moment
is the truth of the world
is available, as I say.
That's an incredible thing.
The truth of this is available,
if somebody wants it.
What that leads you to
is the understanding
that this is a test.
And the test is very simple.
Like, if somebody held a gun
to my head and said right,
you've got 10 seconds to
say the meaning of life
the best you know it, or I'm
going to blow your brains out,
I'd say, OK.
We are being asked to discern
good and evil, right and wrong
behavior and conduct,
and truth and falsehood.
And how do I know that that is
coming to a conclusion point?
Because it's in your face now.
So everybody is being asked
to consider these things.
What the negative
forces are doing
are putting a
tremendous pressure--
a false pressure-- to present
a consensus that is untrue.
Beauty is not relative.
It's absolute.
It's universal.
The beauty of a sunset, the
beauty of a lover's face,
the beauty of form
and proportion,
the beauty of color.
They're universal.
You can show people anywhere
in the world a beautiful thing
and they'll see it.
As long as you remove the
cultural obstructions away,
they can see it.
>>REGINA: Right, exactly.
>>KRAMER: So let let's play
a game for a minute, right?
Let's say there's
a God, good guy.
And he says--
>>REGINA: Or good woman.
>>KRAMER: Or, good woman.
Well, there is a
reason why it's male
but I will get to that
another time-- an entity.
God is there and he says,
OK, the game is come find me,
Right there's another guy
that he actually made, Satan,
and he says, OK.
I'm going to play a game too.
And I've been asked
to play this role.
My rules are there's
nothing to find.
Forget it.
That is, if you're
teaching children--
which I do at times--
that's the game.
God's like, come find me.
Because this is a supernatural
amazing adventure for real.
Not joking, not
figurative language here.
We're not speaking symbolically.
Real.
And Satan's job, made by God
as part of that same test,
is to say, there's
nothing to find.
Forget it.
Are you serious?
There's nothing here, folks.
It's DNA.
It's an empty vacuum of space.
There's nothing here.
>>REGINA: Make it up.
>>KRAMER: It's just humans.
We're the top of the tree.
There's nothing.
That is the game.
All mainstream imperial
media across Europe,
in particular, Africa,
Asia, and America
too-- although America is
much freer, I'm glad to say.
All imperial media is
tipped in this direction
to say there's nothing
to find, all of it.
Beauty shows you there's
something to find.
Truth shows you there's
Because the deeper you pursue
it, you realize it was made.
That beauty was made.
It didn't just
evolve out of carbon.
>>REGINA: It rose
as a happenstance.
>>KRAMER: It didn't just
evolve of, you know,
nitrogen and hydrogen and
snot crawling out of an ocean.
It didn't.
That's garbage.
That evolution is garbage.
It was made.
It was designed.
It's grace and elegance.
It's a gift.
It's an invitation
to know divinity.
And all you've got to do is
trust your instincts on that.
Examine the good
scripture on that.
Speak to wise men
and women you can
locate with a beating
heart in this world.
They will all agree
on that, all of them.
But still, the truth is always
yours-- primarily is yours.
But as you do that, it
will lead you to reality.
This negative game
leads you away.
Now that game, like
every game, is finite.
It doesn't go on for millions
of years forever and ever.
It's finite.
And you know what?
It's coming to its conclusion.
There's not a lot of
that game left now.
Again, why can we say this?
Because it's in your face now.
The guy, the good guy,
God is saying, OK, guys.
I'm going to make this
really, really easy for you.
I'm going to give you so
much incredibly obvious
good and evil in your face,
you'll have to make a decision.
You'll be impelled from within
and compelled from without
to make a decision.
And I'm going to
make it really easy.
Because you know what?
I'm wrapping this up soon.
This is finished soon.
And only those of you who have
taken the time and trouble
to discern what is
real will come with me.
Everything else will be
completely deleted forever.
The entire 3D superstructure
gone forever, gone.
That's the proposition
that I put forward to you.
And with each
passing minute, I'm
more literal in how
I feel about that.
I'm not joking.
It's not figurative.
>>REGINA: Right.
I know you are.
>>KRAMER: I can feel it.
I can feel it all my life.
And it's getting
faster and deeper.
>>REGINA: I feel this
is a critical time
in human consciousness
to make that shift.
>>KRAMER: It is.
>>REGINA: In terms of the end
of the 3D reality, I don't know.
I have no idea.
But in terms of the
absolute necessity
to start making these
leaps in consciousness,
I feel it in my cells as
well, toward whatever end
that might be.
And just to go back
for a moment, for any
of the women in particular
watching, what you mean
God's automatically
a male, you know,
and the creator is a male?
I just want to offer this.
If you're looking at it through
a lens of ancient gnostics,
you would say first
was the logos.
That's simply the
thought, right?
The thought, the
creative thought.
Then the prima material
absorbs the thought
and then makes manifest.
The male and female
work in perfect symmetry
and companionship together.
So in my understanding,
you have the logos,
the thought which is
classified as male
in all ancient traditions--
>>KRAMER: Like the sun.
>>REGINA: Like the sun, exactly.
>>KRAMER: And it's birthed
in life, which is female.
The two characters
without each other--
>>REGINA: The life is all
expressed through the female
and the feminine.
>>KRAMER: Yeah, agreed.
>>REGINA: So there we go.
So let's just say
that is a companion
shift that is beautiful.
>>KRAMER: You're very kind.
You're very kind.
You're very kind to these
watchers and viewers,
aren't you?
How nice you are.
I wouldn't have bothered.
>>REGINA: I value kindness.
It is true.
So now we're going to go
into absolute good and evil.
And I just pulled this
from Nietzsche's "Beyond
Good and Evil", just
the beginning line.
There's this
beautiful poem called
"The Genius of the Heart".
And so we're only going
to share a few words.
It says, "the
genius of the heart
silences all that is
loud and self-satisfied,
teaching it to listen."
So this-- again, this
noise, this distraction,
this pulling down that
anything goes kind of message.
So let's talk about
through your lens
where we begin to discern
absolute good and evil.
He's suggesting the
heart is one mechanism.
>>KRAMER: Absolute
good is reality.
Absolute evil is unreality.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>KRAMER: That's it.
It's as simple as that.
What is real is good.
What is unreal is bad.
>>REGINA: Because it's delusion.
>>KRAMER: Because it's delusion.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>KRAMER: So remember our
game, so the only game in town.
That's it.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KRAMER: The game is what
is real because what is real
is leading you to truth.
And that truth is your
exit from this classroom
to lead the actual adult
spiritual life that this
is preparation for.
This is our childhood.
And it's soon to end.
And when it ends, we'll
go to a new world, which
resembles this in some ways
but is without disharmony
and without the test, because
the test has been completed.
>>REGINA: Which is classically
considered the fourth realm--
>>KRAMER: Well, it's--
>>REGINA: --in
classical teachings.
>>KRAMER: In
classical teachings,
I don't know which ones
you mean, but it could be.
>>REGINA: Non-dimension
fourth realm, but go ahead.
>>KRAMER: I see.
In my teaching,
it would be called
the new Earth, the new heavens.
>>REGINA: Yes.
it's the same.
>>KRAMER: It could be the same.
>>REGINA: Functionally
speaking, it looks the same.
>>KRAMER: Well, it's
a paradise world
which only contains
the people who've
taken the time to
discern, which frankly,
are the people that you'd want
to spend time with in paradise.
So that's a good thing.
The unreal world
here is a world of--
how can I say it--
disavowal.
A world of resignation.
A world of defeat.
A world of giving consent
to things that are wicked.
That's what creates evil.
And if you look at the word
sin, for example, in scripture,
there's 26 different
terms for that.
And they range-- I call it
the traffic lights of sin--
from a green
traffic light, which
is like you've made a mistake.
So that's a kind of sin.
And there's Hebrew and
Greek words for that.
And that's like,
you know, I thought
it was OK to eat this food.
But I realize now that
it's hurting my body.
Or, I thought it was OK
to kiss this lovely woman.
And I realize that's not a good
idea because I don't know her
well enough and it's not fair.
That's an error.
People make those errors
in life and get over it.
You make a change.
You turn.
You change direction.
>>REGINA: You learn from it.
>>KRAMER: You learn from
it, which is repentance.
So you realize you've
made a mistake.
You change direction.
That's what that word means.
The orange level--
the amber level--
is unlawful, where
you're actually going
against what is divine law.
You're going against nature.
You're committing bad acts.
You're stealing stuff.
You're being unkind.
You're adulterous--
unlawful stuff,
which everyone knows that's
not a prudent and virtuous way
to behave.
It's not OK.
The red level is real
transgression, where
you're like, you know what?
There is no God.
That's garbage.
And in fact, as an
unregenerate person,
I am going to just
do whatever it
takes to make me comfortable
and secure and happy,
and whatever pleases me.
And if that means I damaged
somebody or murder them,
or rape them or traffic them,
or eat them, then I'll do it.
And to hell with it,
because I have the power.
To hell with that.
That's your red level.
That's like true transgression.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>KRAMER: Now all the
26 or 27 different terms
for all those
things all mean sin.
Now that's a test of free will.
So when you get to a green
light and you thought,
mm, you know what?
That wasn't very good.
That's your
opportunity to change.
So that repentance--
you know, again,
if you were teaching this
in a Christian school--
is from two terms.
Nacham, a Hebrew
word which means
lamentation-- like, oh, dear.
I've made a mistake.
That wasn't good.
And another word,
Shuv, which means--
[SIGHS] --I'm not
going to do that.
I vow to change direction.
So repentance, Nacham, which
is almost like, oh, no.
It's like an exhale.
It's a sigh.
Lamentation and
changing direction.
That's what repentance is.
That's all it is.
So to repent in modern language
is a really good thing.
And if we just didn't use the
word repentance, you know what?
No one would have a
problem with that.
So repentance is a funny
word in the modern world.
You wouldn't even use that
because people think it's
so antiquated and so strange.
But really, it's just
meaning the vow for goodness
and a recognition
that one has erred,
one has gone in the
wrong direction.
And there's a
better way to do it.
So it's a funny thing to talk
about sin and repentance.
But we've touched on some
esoteric Christian principles,
it's good to actually
define what they are.
So you're asking
about what is good.
What is good is what is real.
What is bad is what is unreal.
That unreality, though, leads
to a moral dissolution, where--
as we've seen in the
news at the moment--
lots of rich and famous
politicians and world leaders
and actors and
musicians, and whatnot,
are involved in some of the most
hideous things I've ever heard
of, which--
I've known this all along.
>>REGINA: To me, absolute evil.
We know this.
>>KRAMER: Absolute evil
is absolute unreality.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KRAMER: So because
they don't see that,
their soul vessel actually
begins to crumble.
And so again, the
soul vessel in Hebrew
would be nephesh, in
Greek would psuche,
which is a vessel that
can receive spirit.
Again, that would
be ruah or pneuma.
And when that vessel
has received spirit,
then you're a spiritual person.
But if the vessel is
empty over and over
and over, it remains
empty over the decades,
it actually crumbles
and disintegrates.
And at that point, you
could truly say for real,
this is a soulless man.
This is a soulless woman.
Their soul is gone.
Yes, it has.
The soul is not immortal.
It's as a transcendental
principle,
which is it can be
filled with spirit.
That is immortality.
Only in God is
there immortality.
Without that filling, though, of
this vessel, it cannot happen.
So absolute evil--
one more point--
absolute evil,
therefore, is the choice,
the unremorseful
choice, to never fill
this with spirit, and
in fact, discard it.
At that point, you're
dealing with an inhuman--
literally and inhuman
person-- at that point.
So that's absolute evil.
Absolute good is
the reverse of that,
where someone
treasures their vessel
and fills it with spirit--
truth, only truth.
And as that gets to
the top, then you're
experiencing a
witness of something
that is transcendental
that is also
carried over to the next world.
Only that can be carried
over full of spirit.
Other than that, this is it.
This is all you've got.
>>REGINA: So in this
delusional and illusory world,
where preferences is being
foisted as our reality--
just choose your reality--
have there have been
times, and if you
can think of any kind of stark
examples, in which there's
been a massly held assumption
of evil that you think
was not accurate?
Or a massly held assumption
of good that was not accurate?
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
Christianity bad, new age good.
>>REGINA: Oh, I see.
>>KRAMER: Wrong, wrong.
>>REGINA: I see
what you're saying.
>>KRAMER: Christianity
good, new age bad.
>>REGINA: From the
basic principles
we were talking
about before, not
the way the Christian
church has been constructed
to delude in its own right.
>>KRAMER: You have
to-- again, let's
highlight that again, because
it's important as you say that.
Real Christian practice
is spiritual life.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KRAMER: Of all my
life of nearly 50 years
now of knowing
this work, nothing
has come close to the potency
of pure Christian practice.
I call it esoteric
Christianity to distinguish it
from the other.
The other, most people's
experience of Christianity
is the church.
The Catholic church.
The Methodist church, various
things like Jehovah's Witness,
Mormonism, all these
different things--
Seventh Day
Adventists, whatever.
That's institutionalized
Christian-themed religion.
That's not what
I'm talking about.
That's not it.
>>REGINA: That's the
theme park version.
>>KRAMER: That's the
Disneyland version.
Disneyland Christianity
is abhorrent to me.
It's no use at all.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KRAMER: So even
in my language,
you know, I purposefully
don't talk about Christianity
to mainstream
audiences because I
know they're not
going to understand
what I'm talking about.
I would hope, of course,
that your viewers--
>>REGINA: We have a much
more nuanced and mystical--
>>KRAMER: --are much
more thinking people.
And they'll think,
well, wait a second.
He's not just going to
say that and suddenly
jump into ignorance.
What does he mean?
So they'll give me that pause.
And then in that
pause, you know,
we have a chance
to reflect on that.
So Christianity
popularity now, if you
walk around Portland, Oregon,
San Francisco, California,
Seattle, Washington,
and said, hey, I'm
a Christian, people will punch
you in the face, most likely.
Because that's
considered now wrong.
If I said, hey, I'm a
social justice new age--
you know-- unreligious person,
a humanist, people will say,
fantastic.
That's great.
Glad to meet you.
I see the error in
those perceptions.
So it's really tough.
Like even in saying it,
new age Christianity--
you know, they're, oh.
They're loaded issues.
But it's a task to
say, well, do you
know the truth of those things?
Are you prepared to look at
the truth of those things?
Is it good to live in a city?
Is it good to live
in a rural place?
What's the truth of that?
Is that relative, or
is that universal?
I know the answer
to that question.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KRAMER: And it's not--
it's not relative.
They're universal
answers, those things.
But they're tough because
all of our lives, anyone
born in the last
100 years, we've
been tutored in relativism
and collectivism.
>>REGINA: Yes we have.
>>KRAMER: And we've been
tutored to say, you know,
it's not right to say this
is right and this is wrong.
Who are you to say?
That's what we're tutored in.
That is wickedness.
That whole idea of it's not
right to call right and wrong
is the death of society.
>>REGINA: I hear
what you're saying.
And I'm finding it really
interesting where I live.
I live in a very rural
area at the foothills
of the Sierra Nevada
mountain range surrounded
by farm animals.
Every kind of crop
grows around there.
It is stunningly beautiful
in its expression of nature,
very abundant.
And what I'm seeing
happen is my father
originally bought this property
and built the house on it
many years ago.
They're all-- that
generation is gone.
They've sold.
They're dying out.
But what's coming in, the people
coming in in their place--
and I'm seeing this
phenomenon all over now even
in magazines--
are mostly fundamentalist
Christian and Mormons,
in particular.
Our whole area has
families with 5, 6, 7
kids that have moved in.
But what's interesting
about it is they
can see what they're doing.
It's a backlash against the
world of untruths and chaotic--
>>KRAMER: Yeah, they're
overcompensating.
>>REGINA: They're
And so they're trying
to get the kids--
which is beautiful.
They're trying to
get the kids back.
They raise little
goats and pigs.
>>KRAMER: I know, it's
a nice overcompensation.
>>REGINA: It's a nice
overcompensation,
but it is a compensation.
But I feel, in their
hearts, they're
just so weary of the
messaging outside.
They don't want their
kids to be exposed to it.
A lot them are homeschooling
for the exact same reason.
But I mean, almost
every family around us
now is back to land, back
to nature, Christianity--
but organized,
formal Christianity
in terms of religious
institutions.
I understand it.
>>KRAMER: I do.
I mean, modern society,
especially in Europe
more than anywhere
else, is debauched.
And it is degenerate, I have
to say, especially in England,
France, Germany, Spain.
America don't realize how lucky
they are to have choices here.
>>REGINA: Tell us about what
you mean by the debauchery,
so to speak, in the European
nations compared to the US.
Because most US
citizens would say,
well, that's happening here
to a large extent as well.
What's the difference
between them?
>>KRAMER: That's a
media illusion that's
been drawn over people's life.
Think, hey, you know,
secretly, we all
think that Britain
and Germany and France
are kind of like a bit more
sophisticated and a bit more
elegant and gracious-- and
have this history, and just
more civilized people.
Wrong, totally wrong.
Those people have been crushed.
And I know that because
I've lived there for--
>>REGINA: Yes, crushed by
their traditions, even.
>>KRAMER: --most of
my life have been
crushed by aristocratic
families who serve evil.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>KRAMER: And that's
been unchanged
for at least two millennia.
What's different about America
is that although it was
certainly a naivete at times--
and if I may say, an
inelegance from time
to time in certain quarters--
>>REGINA: And immaturity.
>>KRAMER: --from an immaturity.
>>REGINA: We're still
growing our history.
>>KRAMER: Just like a child who
went into a fancy restaurant
with clutter around, and not
know what fork to pick up.
And that doesn't mean they're
bad, they just don't know yet.
>>REGINA: We're a young culture
>>KRAMER: Yeah.
There's a gullibility
and a naivete,
and sometimes, an
ungrateful aspect to that.
But let me show you
the flip side of that.
There's a positivity,
a cheerfulness--
>>REGINA: A creativity.
>>KRAMER: --a creativity,
an opportunity
that does not exist
anywhere else in the world.
It's only in America.
>>REGINA: I agree.
>>KRAMER: I am much happier
to be an American citizen
than a British citizen.
And I'm proud to be in
this land of excellence,
which is exceptional in
its spiritual opportunity.
That there is nowhere
else in the world--
take my word for this-- where
you can have that except here.
We have to now look at
what's right and wrong.
Big political issues
about abortion,
about race, about
immigration, about borders--
what do they make you do?
They make you think about it.
They may think, well,
hang on a second.
Is it OK to have open borders?
What does that do to a country?
What is an open border?
What is a country even?
Now whatever you think about
that, that's a very, very
important question to ask.
>>REGINA: Yeah, it's
a very important--
>>KRAMER: Whatever
you think about that,
however kind and bring
everyone of the whole world
into my yard, or nobody except
people who look like me--
whatever.
One extreme or the other,
everything in between, they're
really important
questions to ask
which were never asked
in the common household
until recently.
In my kitchen table
with these people
I care about and the
things that we contemplate
in this home, what is a border?
What is death?
Is it murder killing a fetus?
Or does it have to
be a certain age?
Or is that health care?
Is that reproductive well-being?
What even is that?
And to have people
asking those questions
is incredibly important.
Because truth leads to reality.
Reality is the body,
the imagination of God.
What are those things?
Well, let's define them.
Let's look at them.
If people are doing
that, we're going
to come to a consensus,
which is true.
We're going to find common
ground, which is substantial.
We're going to say,
OK, if you have
a preference against
this culture, this music,
you know what?
That's fine because there's
common ground of moral virtue,
of decency, of civility,
of human creativity.
And potential is huge.
If you don't want to vote
Republican or Democrat,
that's fine.
We're all really
libertarians, in that we
are the sovereign power.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I detest politics.
>>KRAMER: We are
the sovereign power.
There is a sovereign
above us that
grants us that power in
virtue as an endowment,
as a graceful emanation.
And all of us are
equal in that regard--
all of us.
The difference is, if you
don't ask those questions
and you don't have common
ground, then our differences--
our ethnic and racial and
intellectual and physical
differences--
become separations.
They needn't be.
They're complementary
to each other.
And that's the
thing that when we
ask these questions,
forced by what's
on the television and
newspapers, is good.
So I remain optimistic in this.
Even though I think this game
is drawing to its conclusion--
I'll tell you again, the
whole thing forever--
I think that's a good
thing because it means
that the classroom is finished.
We've graduated.
Enough people.
It's not many, but the
critical mass of people
is now in existence.
And as soon as that number
is reached, this is gone.
>>REGINA: OK, then
a final statement
because we are out of time.
And that is, you
believe it is our duty
to begin discerning right
and wrong-- our duty.
>>KRAMER: It says we
have a responsibility
to know right and wrong, good
and evil, truth and falsehood.
You have to do it your own way.
You should seek wise
counsel on that from living,
breathing people you
can sit in front of.
Don't trust YouTube.
You can go to scripture.
You can speak to your own
heart and mind about that.
But your duty to know good and
evil makes this world better.
If you avoid that and
try not to offend people,
and don't say things
that are difficult--
don't go against the grain--
you perpetuate the problem.
So knowing good and evil,
exercising that discernment,
is a spiritual life.
>>REGINA: I agree with you.
And I always love
our conversations.
And they always
stretch people a bit.
And it also requires
nuanced thinking,
and that we're not
encouraged toward that.
And so again, Neil, I love
spending time with you.
We could probably go on
another five or six hours
on all of this.
Thank you.
>>KRAMER: Thank you.
>>REGINA: I hope this has been
an intriguing conversation
for you.
I know it can be a bit
challenging, that time when
Neil and I get together.
But I really feel we need to
go more deeply into reflections
on the nature of reality and the
nature of good and evil itself.
To go there with Neil,
you can find his work
at neilkramer.com.
And you can find his
film, "Transmutation"
at transmutationfilm.com.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds".
[MUSIC PLAYING]